Supervised revision (#146)
UBC-DSCI/introduction-to-datascience: 05-classification.Rmd

```

## Overview 
In previous chapters, we focused solely on descriptive and exploratory
data analysis questions. 
This chapter and the next together serve as our first
foray into answering *predictive* questions about data. In particular, we will
focus on *classification*, i.e., using one or more 

> variables to predict the value of a categorical variable of interest. This chapter

Author: i think "value of a categorical variable" is clearer than "category of a variable", and less awkward than "category of a categorical variable"

```

## Overview 

> Up until this point, we have focused solely on descriptive and exploratory

Reviewer: "about data" at the end of the first two sentences reads a bit akward to me when I read it out loud, is there another way we could say this? Perhaps:

"In previous chapters, we focused solely on descriptive and exploratory data analysis questions." 

I suggest this, as we call these questions types of data analysis questions in chapter 1.

Author: agree!

questions about data. 
This chapter and the next together serve as our first
foray into answering *predictive* questions about data. In particular, we will

> focus on the problem of *classification*, i.e., using one or more quantitative

Reviewer: ```suggestion
focus on answering questions that can be solved by *classification*, i.e., using one or more quantitative
```

Author: just replaced with less wordy "focus on classification"

> variables to predict the value of a third, categorical variable. This chapter

Reviewer: third doesn't really make sense here...
```suggestion
variables to predict the value of another, categorical variable. This chapter
```

Author: agree

- Recognize situations where a classifier would be appropriate for making predictions
- Describe what a training data set is and how it is used in classification
- Interpret the output of a classifier
- Compute, by hand, the straight-line (Euclidean) distance between points on a graph when there are two predictor variables
- Explain the K-nearest neighbour classification algorithm
- Perform K-nearest neighbour classification in R using `tidymodels`  

> - Explain why one should center, scale, and balance data in predictive modelling

Author: agree

past experience with patients; an email provider might want to tag a given
email as "spam" or "not spam" depending on past email text data; or an online

> store may want to predict whether an order is fraudulent or not. 

Author: done

> we use these observations to train, or teach, our classifier so that we can use

Reviewer: A few lines above (sorry GitHub won't let me comment on that line because you didn't change anything there), it says: "predicting a categorical class (sometimes called a *label*) for an observation given its other quantitative variables (sometimes called *features*)"

I don't think we want to say "quantitative variables" when we are generally talking about classification. Categorical predictors can be used with other models (e.g., logistic regression), just not k-nn. However, in this paragraph we are generally talking about classification, not just k-nn. So I think we should remove this, and then make this point about k-nn later on. 

I wonder, also, when we discuss the specifics of k-nn if we want to talk about how it is possible to use binary categorical predictors by coding them to 0 and 1? Students do this in the project a lot, and it would be nice to explain this in the book I think...

Reviewer: Another point with the paragraph above, when we write:

"Generally, a classifier assigns an observation (e.g. a new patient) to a class (e.g.diseased or healthy) on the basis of how similar it is to other observations for which we know the class (e.g. previous patients with known diseases and symptoms). "

We don't specify that observation we are assigning to a class has no measured class/label. We know that, but a new learner might not from what we have written...

Author: agree

> it to make predictions on new data that we have not seen previously.

Reviewer: Here we should also make it explicit we have no label for the data we are trying to predict on.
```suggestion
it to make predictions on new data that we have not seen previously, and that we have no class label for.
```

Author: edited

There are many possible methods that we could use to predict
a categorical class/label for an observation. In this book we will
focus on the simple, widely used **K-nearest neighbours** algorithm.
In your future studies, you might encounter decision trees, support vector machines (SVMs),
logistic regression, neural networks, and more; see the additional resources
section at the end of the next chapter for where to begin learning more about
these other methods. It is also worth mentioning that there are many
variations on the basic classification problem. For example, 
we focus on the setting of **binary classification** where only two
classes are involved (e.g., a diagnosis of either healthy or diseased), but you may 
also run into multiclass classification problems with more than two

> categories (e.g., a diagnosis of healthy, bronchitis, pneumonia, or a common cold).

Reviewer: However, in the worksheets and tutorial problems sets we do have multi-class classification problems... Which makes me wonder, should we mention them in the book?

Author: I would like to include it, but it would require us to do one of:

- have multiple datasets in this chapter (because the one we have is no good for multiclass)
- rewrite the chapter for a dataset where multiclass is doable
- put a paragraph at the end (or somewhere else) without actually exploring it at all

I think the only feasible one of these to do is the third -- I'll open an issue for us to address it separately from this PR.

Author: Issue #163 is open now

Thus, it is important to quickly and accurately diagnose the tumour type to
guide patient treatment.

```{r 05-bc-cells, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE, fig.cap = "A malignant breast fine needle aspiration image. [Source](https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/opre.43.4.570)", fig.retina = 2, out.width="400"}

> knitr::include_graphics("img/malignant_cancer.png")

Author: added to that issue

tissue is removed from the body and examined for the presence of disease.
Traditionally these procedures were quite invasive; modern methods such as fine
needle asipiration, used to collect the present data set, extract only a small
amount of tissue and are less invasive. After taking a digital image of the breast
tissue sample&mdash;such as the one in Figure \@ref(fig:05-bc-cells)&mdash;10 

> different variables (numbers 3-12 below) were measured for each cell nucleus in the image, and then the mean 

Author: punted to chapter-specific issue

8. Compactness: the ratio of squared perimeter and area
9. Concavity: severity of concave portions of the contour 
10. Concave Points: the number of concave portions of the contour
11. Symmetry: how similar the nucleus is when mirrored 
12. Fractal Dimension: a measurement of how "rough" the perimeter is 

Below we use `glimpse` to preview the data frame. This function can make it easier to inspect the data when we have a lot of columns:

> 

Author: I'm putting this in the chapter-specific issue

> "M") more readable by changing them to "Benign" and "Malignant" using the

Author: fixed

`labels` argument.

```{r 05-scatter, fig.height = 4, fig.width = 5, fig.cap= "Scatter plot of concavity versus perimeter coloured by diagnosis label"}
# colour palette

> cbPalette <- c("#E69F00", "#56B4E9", "#009E73", "#F0E442", "#0072B2", "#D55E00", "#CC79A7", "#999999")

Reviewer: If we decide to keep the 8 colours in the palette, the other thing we need to fix is that that line is too long to render well in LaTeX.

perim_concav
```

> In Figure \@ref(fig:05-scatter), we can see that malignant observations typically fall in

Author: edited

my_distances <- table_with_distances(cancer[, attrs], new_point)
neighbours <- cancer[order(my_distances$Distance), ]
```

In order to actually make predictions for new observations in practice, we
will need a classification algorithm; here we will use the K-nearest neighbour
classification algorithm.
To predict the label of a new observation (here, classify it as either benign
or malignant), the K-nearest neighbours classifier generally finds the $K$
"nearest" or "most similar" observations in our training set, and then uses

> their diagnoses to make a prediction for the new observation's diagnosis. To

Reviewer: Should we define what K is here? For example, we could follow that sentence with: "$K$ in this algorithm is number of nearest neighbours, and is a value we choose (we will discuss how we choose this later in the chapter)."

Author: edited

my_distances <- table_with_distances(cancer[, attrs], new_point)
neighbours <- cancer[order(my_distances$Distance), ]
```

In order to actually make predictions for new observations in practice, we

> will need a classification algorithm. Here we will use the K-nearest neighbours

Author: done

classification algorithm.
To predict the label of a new observation (here, classify it as either benign
or malignant), the K-nearest neighbours classifier generally finds the $K$
"nearest" or "most similar" observations in our training set, and then uses
their diagnoses to make a prediction for the new observation's diagnosis. $K$ 

> is a number that we must choose; for now, we will assume that someone has chosen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is a number that we must choose ahead of running the K-nearest neighbours classification algorithm; for now, we will assume that someone has chosen
```

Author: edited

$K$ for us. We will cover how to choose $K$ ourselves in the next chapter. 

To illustrate the concept of K-nearest neighbours classification, we 
will walk through an example.  Suppose we have a
new observation, with perimeter of `r new_point[1]` and concavity of `r new_point[2]`, whose 

> diagnosis "Class" is unknown. This new observation is the red scatter point in
> Figure \@ref(fig:05-knn-1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
diagnosis "Class" is unknown. This new observation is depicted by the red scatter 
point in Figure \@ref(fig:05-knn-1).
```

Author: agree

```{r 05-knn-1, echo = FALSE, fig.height = 4, fig.width = 5, fig.cap="Scatter plot of concavity versus perimeter with new observation labelled in red"}
perim_concav +
  geom_point(aes(x = new_point[1], y = new_point[2]), color = cbPalette[6], size = 2.5)
```
</center>

> Figure \@ref(fig:05-knn-2) shows that the nearest point to this new observation is **malignant** and
> located at the coordinates (`r round(neighbours[1, c(attrs[1], attrs[2])],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Figure \@ref(fig:05-knn-2) shows that the nearest point to this new observation is 
has the diagnosis label of **malignant** 
and located at the coordinates (`r round(neighbours[1, c(attrs[1], attrs[2])],
```

Author: disagree; more wordy and doesn't add anything

> 1)`). The idea here is that if a point is close to another in the scatterplot,
> then the perimeter and concavity values are similar, and so we may expect that
> they would have the same diagnosis. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1)`). The idea here is that if a point is close to another in the scatterplot,
which is due to the perimeter and concavity values being similar, 
we would expect that they would have the same diagnosis. 
```

Author: i like the original wording better; less clunky

```

Suppose we have another new observation with perimeter `r new_point[1]` and
concavity of `r new_point[2]`. Looking at the scatterplot in Figure \@ref(fig:05-knn-4), how would you

> classify this red observation? The nearest neighbour to this new point is a
> **benign** observation at (`r round(neighbours[1, c(attrs[1], attrs[2])], 1)`).
> Does this seem like the right prediction to make? Probably not, if you consider
> the other nearby points...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
classify this red observation? The nearest neighbour to this new point is a
observation at (`r round(neighbours[1, c(attrs[1], attrs[2])], 1)`) that has 
the diagnosis label of benign. Does this seem like the right prediction to make
for the red observation? Probably not, if you consider the other nearby points...
```

Author: edited (but keeping consistent style with earlier)

> So instead of just using the one nearest neighbour, we can consider several
> neighbouring points, say $K = 3$, that are closest to the new red observation
> to predict its diagnosis class. Among those 3 closest points, we use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To improve our prediction we can consider several neighbouring points, say $K = 3$, 
that are closest to the new red observation to predict its diagnosis class, 
instead of just using the one nearest neighbour. 
Among those 3 closest points, we use the
```

Author: edited

**Distance between points** 

We decide which points are the $K$ "nearest" to our new observation
using the *straight-line distance* (we will often just refer to this as *distance*). 
The straight-line distance between any pair of points $(x_a, y_a)$ 
and $(x_b, y_b)$ on the x-y plane can be computed using the following
formula: 

$$\mathrm{Distance} = \sqrt{(x_a -x_b)^2 + (y_a - y_b)^2}$$
```{r 05-multiknn-0, echo = FALSE}
new_point <- c(0, 3.5)
```

> To find the $K$ nearest neighbours to our new observation, we compute the distance
> to each observation in our training data, and take the $K$ observations corresponding to the
> $K$ *smallest* distance values. For example, suppose we want to classify a new 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find the $K$ nearest neighbours to our new observation, we compute the distance
from our new observation, to each observation in our training data, 
and take the $K$ observations corresponding to the
$K$ *smallest* distance values. For example, suppose we want to classify a new 
```

Author: done

observation with perimeter of `r new_point[1]` and 

> concavity of `r new_point[2]`, shown in \@ref(fig:05-multiknn-1). Let's calculate the distances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
concavity of `r new_point[2]`, shown in red in Figure \@ref(fig:05-multiknn-1). Let's calculate the distances
```

Author: agree

> observation with perimeter of `r new_point[1]` and 
> concavity of `r new_point[2]`, shown in \@ref(fig:05-multiknn-1). Let's calculate the distances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
observation with perimeter of `r new_point[1]` and  concavity of `r new_point[2]`, 
shown in \@ref(fig:05-multiknn-1) using $K = 5$. Let's calculate the distances
```

Author: edited

between our new point and each of the observations in the training set to find

> the $K=5$ training observations that are nearest to our new point. 

Reviewer: Can we simply say 5 nearest neighbours here?
```suggestion
the 5 nearest neighbours that are closest to our new point. 
```

Author: edited

You will see in the `mutate` step below, we compute the straight-line

> distance using the formula: we square the differences between the two observations' perimeter 

Reviewer: Should we number formula's and formally reference them when we refer to them in the text, as we do with figures and tables?
```suggestion
distance using the formula given above: we square the differences between the two observations' perimeter 
```

Author: yes, but i'll create a global formatting issue for this instead of just resolving it here

>   slice(1:5) # subset the first 5 rows

Reviewer: The line with mutate above is too long and won't render well in LaTeX, change it to:

```
  mutate(dist_from_new = sqrt((Perimeter - new_obs_Perimeter)^2 + 
                                (Concavity - new_obs_Concavity)^2)) %>%
```

Author: done

```

Below we show in mathematical detail how the `mutate` step was used to compute the `dist_from_new` 
variable (the distance to the new observation) for each of the 5 nearest neighbours in the training
data.

```{r 05-multiknn-4, echo = FALSE}
my_distances <- table_with_distances(cancer[, attrs], new_point)
neighbours <- my_distances[order(my_distances$Distance), ]
k <- 5
tab <- data.frame(neighbours[1:k, ], cancer[order(my_distances$Distance), ][1:k, c("ID", "Class")])
```

> |Perimeter | Concavity | Distance          | Class          |

Reviewer: This is a table that we should have a number and title for, and reference in the text.

-----------------     ----------------- ----------------- 

The result of this computation shows that 3 of the 5 nearest neighbours to our new observation are
malignant (`M`); since this is the majority, we classify our new observation as malignant. 
These 5 neighbours are circled in Figure \@ref(fig:05-multiknn-3).

```{r 05-multiknn-3, echo = FALSE, fig.cap="Scatter plot of concavity versus perimeter with 5 nearest neighbours circled"}
perim_concav + annotate("path",
  x = new_point[1] + 1.4 * cos(seq(0, 2 * pi,
    length.out = 100
  )),
  y = new_point[2] + 1.4 * sin(seq(0, 2 * pi,
    length.out = 100
  ))
)
```
</center>

**More than two predictor variables**

Although the above description is directed toward two predictor variables, 
exactly the same K-nearest neighbour algorithm applies when you
have a higher number of predictor variables (i.e., a higher-dimensional
predictor space).  Each predictor variable may give us new
information to help create our classifier.  The only difference is the formula
for the distance between points. In particular, let's say we have $m$ predictor
variables for two observations $u$ and $v$, i.e., 
$u = (u_{1}, u_{2}, \dots, u_{m})$ and

> $v = (v_{1}, v_{2}, \dots, v_{m})$.

Reviewer: Why did we switch from x & y to u & v? I think this might confuse learners. Also, if we have to use new letters, u and v are less easily to visually discriminate between than most other letter pairings in the alphabet.

Author: we couldn't use x and y twice because x,y are the coordinates in the first example, and u,v are the observation names in the second. now i've just changed both examples to use a, b for observation names.

-----------------     ----------------- ----------------- 

> **More than two predictor variables**

Reviewer: Let's make this a header instead of bold - that way we (and others) can link to it when we want to share it with others.
```suggestion
#### More than two predictor variables**
```

Reviewer: (same with other instances of this in the chapter, e.g., **Summary** below)

Author: doesn't make sense to have a 4th level numbered heading as a subsection of a 2nd level. I also disagree with using numbered subsection headings for this sort of thing -- these aren't notionally different subsections, the boldface i'm using akin to a \paragraph{blah} command in latex. The way it typesets separates the text far too much.

On the other hand, I can imagine when you pdflatex this stuff to generate a PDF copy, those bold things don't look great.

Is there an unnumbered 3rd level subsection heading in Rmd? that would be the ideal solution

I will make a separate issue for this because this sort of thing will have to be made consistent throughout the book anyway.

Author: Issue #164 is open now

*Click and drag the plot above to rotate it, and scroll to zoom. Note that in
general we recommend against using 3D visualizations; here we show the data in
3D only to illustrate what "higher dimensions" and "nearest neighbours" look like,
for learning purposes.*

**Summary**

In order to classify a new observation using a K-nearest neighbour classifier, we have to:

1. Compute the distance between the new observation and each observation in the training set.
2. Sort the data table in ascending order according to the distances.
3. Choose the top $K$ rows of the sorted table.
4. Classify the new observation based on a majority vote of the neighbour classes.

> ## K-nearest neighbours with `tidymodels`

Reviewer: The first sentence below is awkward, let's change it to something like:

"Coding the K-nearest neighbour algorithm in R ourselves would get complicated 
if we wanted to predict the label/class for multiple new observations, 
or if our data had more than two variables."

Reviewer: Also below, let's call `tidymodels` a meta package, as we refer to the `tidyverse` package.

Author: done and opened issue on global formatting pass on what we call packages

> Let's again suppose we have a new observation with perimeter 0 and concavity

Reviewer: I think we need a sentence or two at the beginning of this paragraph that says something like "Let's now walk through how to use the `tidymodels` packages to perform K-nearest neighbours classification. We will use the cancer data set from above, using the perimeter and concavity variables and $K = 5$ to build our classifier. Then we can use it to predict the diagnosis label for a new observation with perimeter 0 and concavity 3.5, where the diagnosis is unknown..."

Author: done

3.5, but its diagnosis is unknown (as in our example above). Suppose we 
want to use the perimeter and concavity predictor variables to
predict the diagnosis class of this observation. Let's pick out our 2 desired
predictor variables and class label and store it as a new dataset named `cancer_train`:

> 

Reviewer: Below we teach:
```
knn_fit <- knn_spec %>%
  fit(Class ~ ., data = cancer_train)
knn_fit
```

Should we instead do:

```
knn_fit <- knn_spec %>%
  fit(Class ~ Perimeter + Concavity, data = cancer_train)
knn_fit
```

So that they learn they can do this kind of syntax (which is more readable when the model is simple, and very commonly seen in R)? And then later, when we show them > 2 predictors move to the `Class ~ .` syntax?

Reviewer: Also below, let's change:

"Finally, we make the prediction on the new observation by calling the `predict` function,passing the fit object we just created. "

to 

"Finally, we make the prediction on the new observation by calling the `predict` function,passing the fit object we just created and the new observation."

(sorry for not suggesting a change, GitHub wouldn't let me again...)

Author: I ended up just doing a little paragraph on `resp ~ pred + pred` vs ` resp ~ .` where I first introduce it. Makes sense to do introduce that concept here. Also if we don't do that we'll have to change everything downstream, which will certainly introduce new errors

> predictors (coloured by diagnosis) for both the unstandardized data we just

Author: done

So far, there is not much in the recipe; just a statement about the number of targets
and predictors. Let's add scaling (`step_scale`) and centering (`step_center`) steps for 
all of the predictors so that they each have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.
Note that `tidyverse` actually provides `step_normalize`, which does both centering and scaling in

> a single recipe step; in this book we will use the separate `step_scale` and `step_center` steps. 

Author: done

scaled_cancer
```

> Figure \@ref(fig:05-scaling-plt) shows the two scatter plots side-by-side&mdash;one for `unscaled_cancer` and one for

Reviewer: I wonder if at some point in this section we want to explain why it's so damn complicated to scale and centre the data... We have to make a `recipe`, add `step`'s to it, `prep` it and then `bake` it, yikes! Can't we just use `scale`? Of course we can, but then we can't transform the test data set. Problem is the learners don't yet see this problem... But I still think we kind of need to tell them there's a good reason coming up as to why we need to do this in this way. And then in the next chapter, we should make sure to draw attention to this (in particular in `predict` where the `recipe` is automatically applied to new data when `predict` is given a `workflow` object and new data).

Author: done

`scaled_cancer`. Each has the same new observation annotated with its $K=3$ nearest neighbours.
In the plot for the nonstandardized original data, you can see some odd choices
for the three nearest neighbours. In particular, the "neighbours" are visually
well within the cloud of benign observations, and the neighbours are all nearly
vertically aligned with the new observation (which is why it looks like there
is only one black line on this plot).  Here the computation of nearest
neighbours is dominated by the much larger-scale area variable. On the right,
the plot for standardized data shows a much more intuitively reasonable
selection of nearest neighbours. Thus, standardizing the data can change things
in an important way when we are using predictive algorithms.  As a rule of
thumb, standardizing your data should be a part of the preprocessing you do
before any predictive modelling / analysis.

> ```{r 05-scaling-plt, echo = FALSE, fig.height = 4, fig.width = 10, fig.cap = "Comparison of K = 3 nearest neighbours with standardized and unstandardized data"}

Reviewer: I find the plot on the left hard to interpret. Maybe an inset where we zoom in could help? The trouble is you can't actually see the neighbours...

Author: Great idea, but I don't have time to do this. I'm going to open a new issue for it.

now we will remove many of the observations of malignant tumours, simulating
what the data would look like if the cancer was rare. We will do this by
picking only 3 observations randomly from the malignant group, and keeping all
of the benign observations. The new imbalanced data is shown in Figure \@ref(fig:05-unbalanced).

```{r 05-unbalanced, fig.height = 4, fig.width = 5, fig.cap = "Imbalanced data"}

> set.seed(3)

Reviewer: This is another example of a seed we might want to make part of a more standard seed scheme, if possible.

Author: already an issue for this for a later global pass

Author: #168

 manually when we created `knn_spec` above). But now the fit object also includes information about
the overall workflow, including the centering and scaling preprocessing steps.

> Let's visualize the predictions that this trained K-nearest neighbour model will make on new observations.

Reviewer: If we are putting it all together, we should also `predict`, right? This might be the place to make the point that the workflow object bakes the new data!

Author: i plan to do this and the below comment (they're interdependent)

Author: done

> Figure \@ref(fig:05-workflow-plot-show) visualizes the predictions that this 

Reviewer: This should be a separate section I think. To clearly indicate it is not part of the workflow part, and to indicate this is "bonus" or "optional" material.

Author: the code should be optional, and i'll make that clear. but looking at the visualization should not be

trained K-nearest neighbour model will make on new observations.
Although you have seen coloured prediction map visualizations like this a few times now,
we have not included the code to generate them, as it is a little bit complicated.
For the interested reader who wants a learning challenge, we now include it below. 
The basic idea is to create a grid of synthetic new observations using the `expand.grid` function, 
predict the label of each, and visualize the predictions with a coloured scatter having a very high transparency 
(low `alpha` value) and large point radius. See if you can figure out what each line is doing!

```{r 05-workflow-fit-plot} 

> # create the grid of area/smoothness vals, and arrange in a data frame

Reviewer: A few of the lines of code below are too long to render in the LaTeX format.

Author: created a new global pass issue for this #200
